//
// Author : C Remus
//
// Changed by : ...
//

== X11 notes about Xsync errors and working with threads in X11 applications ==

    This document contains (very) short notes about threads in X11,
taken from the net forums and docs.
    Please read the Xlib Programming manual and X11 tutorials.
    Code which implements the notes below was tested and it works fine.

    If "Xlib: unexpected async reply" error message appears, then for
sure some thread code does not call X functions correctly.



    If these notes are disregarded, then the application may appear to
work fine, until a point in time when:
- it starts to loose events;
- appear to freeze for a time;
- behaves unpredictably;
- in gdb, the application may appear to be locked after a call to XSync().



    When working with threads in any X11 application, the following
notes apply:

- it doesn't matter if the application uses wxWidgets, or GTK, or
  Motif, or any other library; some libraries, like QT4, already
  contains code for these rules, implemented in a way that is
  transparent to the developer.

- if a thread doesn't call routines for updating the display, or
  routines for working with messages, it's ok leave that code as it
  is.

- if at least one thread calls routines for updating the display,
  or routines for working with messages, then in the main thread,
  before starting any other thread, XInitThreads() should be used

- in every thread that draws something in a window call
  XLockDisplay(Display *display) before draw and
  XUnlockDisplay(Display *display) after draw

- events must be read from a single thread, usually the main one

- the event-process code can be written in another thread, but mutexes
  (or semaphores, or conditions, etc.) should be used to be sure that
  the data processed is not changed before the end of the
  event-process

- another method is to use XOpenDisplay() in the thread that owns
  (create, update, destroy) a window, and that thread must have it's
  own event-loop (i didn't tested if this really works smoothly)

    Events specified here refers to: X11 events, keyboard events

    QT, GTK, wxWidgets all have equivalent functions. Use them as
appropriate instead of Xlib functions for platform compatibility.

// --EOF--
